Document recovery from broken kubelet certificate (#28312)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubeadm/kubeadm-certs.md

Client certificates generated by [kubeadm](/docs/reference/setup-tools/kubeadm/) expire after 1 year. This page explains how to manage certificate renewals with kubeadm.

{{< warning >}}
By default, kubeadm configures kubelet to renew its certificate automatically in `/var/lib/kubelet/pki/`, and it is not handled by `kubeadm certs` subcommands. The auto-renew process may sometime fail, see [below](#kubelet-client-cert).

> {{< /warning >}}

Reviewer: i think we can remove this block.

there is already this in the document:
```
{{< note >}} kubelet.conf is not included in the list above because kubeadm configures kubelet for automatic certificate renewal. {{< /note >}}
```

we can amend the same note to link to a new section in here:
https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/troubleshooting-kubeadm/

that seems a better place for the mini-guide despite my initial suggestion. sorry about that.

amended version:
```
{{< note >}} kubelet.conf is not included in the list above because kubeadm configures kubelet for automatic certificate renewal. To troubleshoot an expired kubelet client certificate see [Troubleshooting kubelet client certificates rotation](....) {{< /note >}}
```

Author: Ok. I also added also a link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tls/certificate-rotation/ if that's ok ?

Client certificates generated by [kubeadm](/docs/reference/setup-tools/kubeadm/) expire after 1 year. This page explains how to manage certificate renewals with kubeadm.

{{< warning >}}
By default, kubeadm configures kubelet to renew its certificate automatically
in `/var/lib/kubelet/pki/`, and it is not handled by `kubeadm certs` subcommands.

> The auto-renew process may sometime fail, see [below](#kubelet-client-cert).

Reviewer: i don't like to include warnings such as "sometimes fail", unless we have a concrete explanation about the "why".

one scenario that is plausible in theory is:
- kubelet runs for 8 months
- the user shuts down the host
- restarts it after 4 months
- the certificate has expired

(but i don't think we should include such detail either.

see https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/28312#discussion_r646798474 for my recommendation instead of this "warning".

Author: Yeah I saw, work in progress, sorry I was interrupted, will commit shortly

{{< /warning >}}

{{< note >}}
`kubelet.conf` is not included in the list above because kubeadm configures kubelet
for [automatic certificate renewal](/docs/tasks/tls/certificate-rotation/)
with rotatable certificates under `/var/lib/kubelet/pki`.
To repair an expired kubelet client certificate see

> [Kubelet client certificate rotation fails](/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/troubleshooting-kubeadm/#kubelet-client-cert)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Kubelet client certificate rotation fails](/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/troubleshooting-kubeadm/#kubelet-client-cert).
```

minor nit, missing dot.

in the CSR but also verifies the requested IPs and domain names. This would prevent
a malicious actor that has access to a kubelet client certificate to create
CSRs requesting serving certificates for any IP or domain name.

> ## Troubleshooting kubelet client certificates rotation {#kubelet-client-cert}

Reviewer: we should move this to https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/troubleshooting-kubeadm/

> kubelet handles its own client certificates, located in `/var/lib/kubelet/pki/`, unless [rotation](/docs/tasks/tls/certificate-rotation/) is manually disabled. For this reason, `kubeadm certs` subcomands ignore kubelet certificates. The kubelet auto-renew process has [been](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubeadm/issues/581) [reported](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/102556) to fail, which can break the control-plane. One sign of this is `x509: certificate has expired or is not yet valid` errors in apiserver logs. To fix the issue:

Reviewer: please break this long line into multiple lines (see the rest of the document)

> kubelet handles its own client certificates, located in `/var/lib/kubelet/pki/`, unless [rotation](/docs/tasks/tls/certificate-rotation/) is manually disabled. For this reason, `kubeadm certs` subcomands ignore kubelet certificates. The kubelet auto-renew process has [been](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubeadm/issues/581) [reported](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/102556) to fail, which can break the control-plane. One sign of this is `x509: certificate has expired or is not yet valid` errors in apiserver logs. To fix the issue:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, kubeadm configures a kubelet with automatic rotation of the client certificate located
in `/var/lib/kubelet/pki/` and path specified in `/etc/kubernetes/kubelet.conf`. If this rotation process
fails you might see errors such as `x509: certificate has expired or is not yet valid` in kube-apserver logs.

To fix the issue:
```

> 1. Check that `/var/lib/kubelet/pki/kubelet-client-current.pem` is a symlink. If not, backup and delete it. kubelet will be recreate it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Check that `/var/lib/kubelet/pki/kubelet-client-current.pem` is a symlink. If not, backup and delete it.
The kubelet will recreate it.
```

> 2. Backup and delete `/etc/kubernetes/kubelet.conf`, regenerate with `kubeadm init phase kubeconfig kubelet`, pass the `--config` file you used with `kubeadm init`, or if the cluster is too old, create a config file, or don't use one and manually edit the new `kubelet.conf` if necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Backup and delete `/etc/kubernetes/kubelet.conf` and regenerate it with
`kubeadm init phase kubeconfig kubelet`. Pass the original `--config` file you used with `kubeadm init`.
If you don't have it, manually edit the `kubelet.conf`.
```

> 3. Restart the `kubelet` service and delete the `kube-apiserver` POD. Wait for `kubelet-client-current.pem` to be created/updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Call `systemctl restart kubelet` to restart the kubelet and wait for `kubelet-client-current.pem`
to be recreated.
```

i don't think we have to delete the kube-apiserver mirror pod. it would just accept incoming connection from the updated kubelet client?

Author: Makes sense. I know I did in my case, but indeed it was probably not necessary.

4. Run `kubeadm init phase kubelet-finalize all` using `--config` file if necessary.

> 5. Restart kubelet again

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Restart the kubelet again
```

> 6. Sometimes it may be necessary to `kubeadm certs renew all`, and then restart kubelet and kube-system PODs (or reboot the node).

Reviewer: i don't think this step is required for troubleshooting the kubelet client cert on a particular node.
it would update all CP certificates for this node, which means on HA setups the user must do the same on all nodes.

> Only steps 2 to 5 are necessary to manually renew the kublet client certificate. But depending on the root cause of renew failure, the other steps may be needed to recover.

Reviewer: i think we can omit this.

Author: Well, in my case the cluster was not working without it.
As a compromise, I changed the phrasing to make the steps to fix the kublet cert stand out more, and a separate the from this. This way it doesn't get in the way too much, but can still help some. Are you ok with this ? See commit 524c8dd25 or last paragraph

in the CSR but also verifies the requested IPs and domain names. This would prevent
a malicious actor that has access to a kubelet client certificate to create
CSRs requesting serving certificates for any IP or domain name.

## Troubleshooting kubelet client certificates rotation {#kubelet-client-cert}

By default, kubeadm configures a kubelet with automatic rotation of the client certificate located
in `/var/lib/kubelet/pki/` and path specified in `/etc/kubernetes/kubelet.conf`. If this rotation process
fails you might see errors such as `x509: certificate has expired or is not yet valid` in kube-apserver logs.
To fix the issue, first check that `/var/lib/kubelet/pki/kubelet-client-current.pem`
is a symlink. If not, backup and delete it. The kubelet will recreate it.
Then follow these steps:
1. Backup and delete `/etc/kubernetes/kubelet.conf` and regenerate it with

> `kubeadm init phase kubeconfig kubelet`. Pass the original `--config` file you used with `kubeadm init`. If you don't have it, manually edit the `kubelet.conf`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`kubeadm init phase kubeconfig kubelet`. Pass the original `--config` file you used with `kubeadm init`.
If you don't have it, manually edit the `kubelet.conf`.
```

breaking this to two lines as well.

2. Restart the kubelet (`systemctl restart kubelet`) and wait for
`kubelet-client-current.pem` to be recreated.
3. Run `kubeadm init phase kubelet-finalize all` using `--config` file if necessary.
4. Restart the kubelet again

Depending on the root cause of the failure, it might be necessary to
`kubeadm certs renew all` after the kubelet certificate is fixed, and then restart
kubelet and kube-system PODs (or reboot the node).

> Note that on high availability setups, this must be done on all nodes.

Reviewer: i have tested recovery of expired kubelet certificates before. also we have recommended the above steps to other users, prior to your report. the `kubeadm certs renew all` and static pod restarts were not needed.

are you sure something else was not at play?

Author: I'm 100% sure `kubeadm cert renew all` before the kubelet cert renew steps did not nothing for me, and after kubelet cert renew I restarted everything and it was still not working, and after I kubeadm cert renew again it worked. But as you said, I'm not sure if there were other factors. My kubelet user changed, when I recreated a kubelet.conf, don't know if it's related.

On the one hand my suggestion is probably not very sound, on the other hand it worked for me and it is a troubleshooting section after all. You tell me :shrug:

Reviewer: > My kubelet user changed, when I recreated a kubelet.conf, don't know if it's related.

nope, i don't think the apiserver would have to be restarted due to that. it would accept the new client connection as long as the credentials are valid.

> On the one hand my suggestion is probably not very sound, on the other hand it worked for me and it is a troubleshooting section after all. You tell me

hard too say. too many moving parts.

i still think we can remove this last paragraph and based on my understanding of the kubelet <-> apiserver setup.
full CP component cert rotation and restart in HA setups is a complicated and we have to have good evidence about it.
